

===== PAGE 1 =====

CommonPower: A Framework for Safe
Data-Driven Smart Grid Control
Michael Eichelbeck, Hannah Markgraf, and Matthias Althoff
Abstract—The growing complexity of power system manage-
ment has led to an increased interest in reinforcement learning
(RL). To validate their effectiveness, RL algorithms have to
be evaluated across multiple case studies. Case study design is
an arduous task requiring the consideration of many aspects,
among them the influence of available forecasts and the level of
decentralization in the control structure. Furthermore, vanilla RL
controllers cannot themselves ensure the satisfaction of system
constraints, which makes devising a safeguarding mechanism a
necessary task for every case study before deploying the system.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce the Python tool
CommonPower, the first general framework for the modeling
and simulation of power system management tailored towards
machine learning. Its modular architecture enables users to focus
on specific elements without having to implement a simulation
environment. Another unique contribution of CommonPower is
the automatic synthesis of model predictive controllers and safe-
guards. Beyond offering a unified interface for single-agent RL,
multi-agent RL, and optimal control, CommonPower includes a
training pipeline for machine-learning-based forecasters as well
as a flexible mechanism for incorporating feedback of safeguards
into the learning updates of RL controllers.
Index Terms—Safe reinforcement learning, energy manage-
ment, model predictive control, multi-agent systems, and forecast
uncertainties.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NCREASING adoption of intermittent renewable energy
generation and complex power demand patterns, e.g., from
electrifying heating and mobility, challenge power system con-
trol. Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising
method as it does not require explicit model knowledge
and can automatically adapt to changing parameters. RL
controllers have successfully been demonstrated for V olt-
Var control, frequency control, economic dispatch, and smart
home energy management [1]. Additionally, distributed control
based on multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides
a versatile data-driven approach largely using local information
[2]–[4].
RL controllers have demonstrated competitive performance
compared to model predictive controllers (MPC) at signifi-
cantly lower computational costs [5]. Furthermore, there is
evidence that RL controllers can learn the implicit patterns
of disturbances and thus outperform a nominal MPC in a
setting with inaccurate forecasts [6]. For all its promise,
This work was partially supported by the German Research Foundation
(grant no. 458030766) and the Bavarian Research Foundation project STROM
(Energy - Sector coupling and microgrids, AZ-1473-20). The authors are with
the School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University
of Munich, Germany.
E-mail:michael.eichelbeck@tum.de
integrating RL controllers into smart grids faces a major
challenge since vanilla RL cannot guarantee the satisfaction
of system constraints.
Safe RL is an active area of research with a large amount of
existing literature [7]–[10]. While there exist many algorithms
that satisfy constraints with high probability, the critical nature
of power systems renders guaranteed constraint satisfaction
a strict requirement for the real-world deployment of RL
controllers. Such mechanisms are generally hand-crafted for
individual case studies [11]–[14], which is a tedious task for
practitioners and can be prohibitively hard for non-experts.
Further, it does not allow for a general approach for passing
feedback from the safety mechanism to the RL agent, which
has been shown to influence control performance [15], [16]. A
more generic approach is to establish safety guarantees based
on simplified system models that enclose all possible behaviors
considering parametric uncertainties and disturbances [15].
Beyond the study of safeguarding mechanisms, there are
two further aspects of smart grid control that are becoming
increasingly relevant and motivate further research. Firstly,
the adoption of local energy communities, virtual power
plants, and supply/demand aggregators results in more and
more distributed control settings combining different types
of controllers [17], [18]. Secondly, data-driven models are
becoming the standard forecasting approach as they show
significant promise to improve forecast accuracy and thus
control performance [19]–[22]. Before presenting how our
tool addresses these challenges in Section I-B, we provide
an overview of existing Python libraries for modeling power
systems and interfacing RL agents.
A. Related Work
Andes gym[23] provides one single-agent RL environment
for frequency and voltage control. It is based on theANDESli-
brary [24], which features a symbolic modeling framework and
optimized numerical simulations.Gym-ANM[25], [26] targets
economic dispatch use cases and notably includes an MPC
as a baseline, which is, however, limited to the pre-defined
device models.Grid2op[27], [28] presents a framework for
power grid management in which agents can control both the
grid topology and power dispatch. Furthermore, it can model
opponents that attempt to destabilize the system.PowerGym
[29] is a library designed for V olt-Var control in distribution
networks and utilizes the Python version of OpenDSS for solv-
ing provided system constraints. The toolpython-microgrid
[30] is a lightweight framework for economic dispatch in
microgrids.RLGC[31] is a library tailored for emergency
arXiv:2406.03231v5  [eess.SY]  29 Sep 2025


===== PAGE 2 =====

control, e.g., generator dynamic braking or under-voltage load
shedding using the Java tool InterPSS for simulation. Lastly,
SustainGym[32] is a collection of benchmarks for single-
agent and multi-agent control covering five distinct energy
management use cases.
Toolboxes for MARL exist mainly for home energy man-
agement and economic dispatch applications.CityLearn[2],
[33] provides both benchmark environments and baseline im-
plementations for demand response of buildings using single-
agent and multi-agent RL. This framework is extended by
a power grid model inGridLearn[3] so that tasks, such as
voltage regulation, can be addressed. Both libraries focus on
decentralized control of active storage components, such as
thermal energy storage or batteries, and rely on pre-simulated
heating and cooling demands.PowerGridWorld[4] provides
a modular framework for modeling multi-agent scenarios,
relying on OpenDSS for solving power flow.
All existing tools share the key limitation that they do
not maintain a symbolic system model that can readily be
exposed to controllers or safeguards. This disconnect requires
users to implement model-based safeguarding or model-based
control specifically for each case study, which becomes a very
laborious task for large or heterogeneous systems. Device-
level safety mechanisms are hard-coded and cannot readily
provide feedback to controllers. All tools either rely on a
set of built-in, specifically structured components or external
simulation tools that require complex tabular configuration
files, limiting flexibility and ease of use. Further, existing
tools cannot simulate different types of controllers, such as
RL-based, rule-based, or model-based, in the same system.
This limits the possibility of modeling complex distributed
control structures. Lastly, of all investigated tools, only python-
microgrid provides a generic forecaster interface, and none
includes functionality for developing machine-learning-based
forecasters. This makes it cumbersome to study the influence
of forecaster accuracy and requires external tool support for
the training of machine-learning-based forecasters.
B. Contributions
Our Python library CommonPower 1 closes the aforemen-
tioned gaps and addresses the need for a versatile tool facilitat-
ing the exploration of safe controllers in a large variety of use
cases. As such, it provides acommonground for researchers
and practitioners in the area of data-driven smart grid control.
CommonPower contains the following main features:
•Modular architecture: CommonPower has a highly
modular approach in which power system entities, con-
trollers, safeguards, forecasters, and data sources are
abstracted as objects with clearly defined interfaces.
•Flexible component modeling: As a framework, Com-
monPower facilitates the modeling of arbitrary scenarios.
The built-in models of buses, devices, or power flow can
easily be extended, or entirely custom components can be
implemented, and their symbolic model is automatically
considered. CommonPower integrates several modeling
1https://github.com/TUMcps/commonpower
utilities, e.g., for piece-wise continuous models, and sup-
ports the integration of external tools to simulate complex
dynamics of individual devices.
•Adaptive RL safeguarding: Since CommonPower main-
tains a symbolic representation of the system under
study, model-based safeguarding approaches for RL can
be derived automatically. The built-in implementation is
based on a robust optimal control formulation of the
system constraints and considers model uncertainties as
well as disturbances.
•Built-in robust MPC: CommonPower utilizes its sym-
bolic representation to automatically synthesize a robust
model predictive controller that can serve, e.g., as a
credible baseline or as a basis for imitation learning.
•Unified RL interface: CommonPower implements a
unified gymnasium environment [34] for single-agent and
multi-agent RL. This facilitates the comparison of both
paradigms and makes it possible to directly integrate any
algorithm or library supporting the gymnasium interface.
•Heterogeneous distributed control structures: Due to
the modular design of CommonPower, different types
of controllers can be combined in the same multi-agent
system. Based on a highly flexible problem formulation,
any controller can be mapped to an arbitrary number of
controllable entities.
•Data-driven forecasting: Beyond providing a generic
forecaster interface, CommonPower implements a frame-
work for training, evaluating, and tuning machine-
learning-based prediction models.
•Integration and documentation: To facilitate integration
into ongoing projects, a power grid import interface to the
well-known librarypandapower[35] is provided. Fur-
thermore, CommonPower implements an interface to the
libraryPyTupli[36], a toolbox for managing experience
tuples for offline and continual learning. The code base is
well documented and includes several tutorials to support
user on-boarding 2.
C. Organization
After introducing some notation and background (Sec. II),
we formulate our high-level control problem and establish
its corresponding RL environment (Sec. III). Afterward, we
describe how power systems and forecasters are modeled in
CommonPower (Sec. IV), followed by presenting our unified
approaches to control and safeguarding (Sec. V). Finally, we
investigate several case studies (Sec. VI) and conclude (Sec.
VII).
II. PRELIMINARIES
The primary application areas of CommonPower are smart
home energy management, demand response, and economic
dispatch in modern microgrids, which we model as discrete-
time receding-horizon optimal control problems. We consider
our system to have a set of busesN, a state vectorx∈ X,
2https://commonpower.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


===== PAGE 3 =====

RL agent 1MPC
Utility grid
Supercomputing
center
Large-scale
storage
Buildings
STAGE 2
STAGE 1
RL agent 2
(a) Two-stage control with balancing assets operated by an MPC and two
different coalitions controlled by multi-agent RL.
RL agent 1
Utility grid
Supercomputing
center
Large-scale
storage
BuildingsSTAGE 1
(b) Centralized control using RL.
Fig. 1. Microgrid of a university campus with several prosumers and different control architectures that can be realized using CommonPower.
an input vectoru∈ U, and a disturbance vectorw∈ W, to
formulate dynamic and algebraic constraints:
∀i∈N,∀t:x i
t+1 =f i(xi
t,ui
t,wi
t)(1a)
0≤g i(xi
[·],ui
[·],wi
[·])(1b)
0≤d(x t,ut,wt)(1c)
wt∈W t = [wt,wt]⊆ W,(1d)
where[·]denotes a trajectory and the superscriptiindicates
association with busi∈N. We assume access to forecasts
ˆwt ∈ Wt of disturbances, where the disturbance set is
obtained by conformance checking [37]. The constraints in
(1b) typically represent charging or total energy requirements
of electric vehicles or flexible loads, which couple multiple
time steps and, therefore, consider trajectories. Power flow
constraints between buses are contained in (1c).
Generally, the system (1) is not exactly known, which is one
core motivation for using RL. To facilitate optimal control and
model-based safeguarding, we assume that a system model
˜f(·),˜g(·)is available. For optimal control, there are no
restrictions on the model complexity, as long as it can be
expressed within the symbolic modeling framework Pyomo
[38], [39] (see Sec. IV). For providing formal guarantees via
our safeguarding approach, we assume that the model ˜f(·),
˜g(·)is obtained via reachset-conformant identification [40]–
[42] to ensure thatx t∈X t always holds, where
Xi
t+1 = ˜fi(Xi
t,ui
t,Wi
t) =n
˜fi(xi
t,ui
t,wi
t)
∃xi
t∈X i
t,∃wi
t∈W i
t
o
. (2)
For the sake of computational efficiency, CommonPower cur-
rently guarantees this containment condition only if ˜fi(·)and
˜gi(·)are input-switched piece-wise continuous functions with
piece-wise sign-stable Jacobian. This is further explained in
Sec. V-C. To guarantee safety beyond the control horizon, we
pose the condition that we can always find an input that steers
the system into a robust control invariant set [43].
III. PROBLEMSTATEMENT
We consider complex distributed control structures that
are becoming increasingly relevant as local generation and
energy storage assets enable prosumer-level optimization. As a
motivating example, we introduce an urban university campus
microgrid in Fig. 1. It contains a supercomputing center
run by an independent organization, several buildings of the
university, and a large-scale battery storage unit.
In our problem statement, the set of all prosumersP⊆N
represents individual stakeholders, while a set of balancing
assetsA=N\Prepresents assets that can be utilized by the
grid operator to establish grid stability. Prosumers can form
disjoint coalitionsG k⊆P, TGk =∅, SGk =Pin which
members can exchange information, are each controlled by a
controller, and are, in a multi-agent setup, mapped to an agent.
Fig. 1a illustrates the high degree of flexibility that can
be achieved with this formulation. Here, all buildings and
the supercomputing center are prosumers and the storage
unit is considered a balancing asset. The three university
buildings form the first coalition, and the supercomputing
center forms the second coalition, both controlled by one RL
agent, respectively. In this most general setup, the control input
for each time step is computed in two stages. In the first
stage, all coalitions independently determine their inputs by
solving a robust optimal control problem. Since the coalitions
do not consider power flow constraints, the grid operator
dispatches their balancing assets in the second stage. The
imbalance mechanism incurs a cost that can be redistributed
to the coalitions in some user-defined way. In this work, we
refer tocentralized controlfor the special case in which there
is one coalitionG=P=Nwith a single controller and no
balancing assets. This results in a single-stage problem, which
is illustrated in Fig. 1b.
For the subsequent formalization, let us introduce the nom-
inal trajectory of statesˆx [·] under the predicted disturbance
trajectoryˆw[·]. In every time step and with a control horizon


===== PAGE 4 =====

T, the two-stage dispatch problem is formalized as follows:
Stage 1min
uk
[·]
TX
t=0
Jk(uk
t,X k
t ,Wk
t )(3a)
s.t.
∀i∈G k∈G,∀t∈[0,T]X i
t+1 = ˜fi(Xi
t,ui
t,Wi
t)(3b)
0≤˜gi(Xi
[·],ui
[·],Wi
[·])
Stage 2min
uA
[·]
TX
t=0
JA(uA
t ,XA
t ,WA
t )(3c)
s.t.
∀i∈A,∀t∈[0,T]X i
t+1 = ˜fi(Xi
t,ui
t,Wi
t)(3d)
0≤˜gi(Xi
[·],ui
[·],Wi
[·])
0≤d(ˆxt,uA
t ,ˆwt).
After each time step, the system evolves according to (1)
andX (·)
0 ={x (·)
0 }is a measurement of the current system
state. Note that we only enforce the power flow constraints on
the nominal system trajectory for the sake of computational
efficiency. Our formulation can be extended to arbitrarily
nonlinear functions and robust power flow feasibility by
following the iterative approach from [44]. Here, we would
compute nominal optimal trajectories with gradually tighten-
ing constraints, which are verified under disturbance using
reachability analysis based on conservative linearization [45],
[46].
The problem statement can be considered to be a sequential
decision-making process under uncertainty. RL is the standard
machine learning approach for solving such problems. Decen-
tral control of a system with multiple agents can be realized
using multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). In MARL,
the underlying control problem is commonly modeled as a
partially observable Markov game (POMG). It is defined as a
tuple(L,S,(U ℓ,Oℓ,Rℓ)∀ℓ∈L,Φ,γ)[47, Sec. 3.1], where
•L={1,...,L}is the set of agents,
•S= [s ,¯s]is the global state space of the environment,
•O ℓ = [oℓ,¯oℓ]is the observation space of an agent,
•U ℓ = [uℓ,¯uℓ]is the action space of an agent,
•R ℓ :O ℓ×U ℓ→Ris the agent-specific reward function,
•Φ :S×U 1×...×U L×S→Ris the probability density
function modeling state transitions, and
•γ∈[0,1)is the discount factor used to weigh future
rewards.
We use the notation(U ℓ,Oℓ,Rℓ)∀ℓ∈L to refer to the tuple
of individual quantities(U 1,...,U L,O 1,...,O L,R 1,...,R L).
Single-agent RL control is a special case of the above POMG
withL= 1, resulting in a Markov decision process (MDP).
The actions of an RL agentℓcontrolling one coalitionG k
areu ℓ
t =u k
t . The default configuration for observations is
oℓ
t = [x k
t,wk
t,ˆwk
[t+1,...,H]], whereHis a forecast horizon
that can be specified by the user. The default can be over-
written for each agent individually, enabling observation of
arbitrary model data of the controlled coalition as well as
data from other coalitions. The global state of the POMG
is the concatenation of all observationss t = [o 1
t,...,o L
t ],
System
Power Flow
Node Bus
Line Device
1
1
1 0..*
1
0..*
1
0..*
AssociationComposition Generalization
Fig. 2. UML class diagram of power system entities.
where duplicates can be removed if desired. Finally, the reward
Rℓ
t =−J k(uk
t,xk
t,wk
t )is computed.
IV. MODELING
CommonPower comprises two domains: the object domain
and the symbolic domain. The object domain makes it possible
to conveniently compose power systems and provides inter-
faces to external libraries or tools. In the symbolic domain,
all power system entities have a symbolic representation. They
specify the variables and constraints that constitute the system
model corresponding to the problem formulation in (3). With
this approach, object-oriented programming features, such as
inheritance, can be leveraged while maintaining full symbolic
expressiveness.
The class diagram in Fig. 2 shows how case studies are
composed in the object domain. A number of buses are
assigned to the rootSystemobject, with eachBusbeing
assigned an arbitrary number ofDevices, e.g., batteries,
electric vehicles, gas turbines, etc. A singleton instance of
PowerFlowrepresenting algebraic constraints between buses
is assigned to the system object in conjunction with a number
ofLinesconnecting the buses. Instances of buses and devices
can define the system dynamicsf(·)as a simple Python
function that is executed during simulation. This realizes
the integration of external software, such as Simulink, and
supports hardware-in-the-loop simulation.
In the symbolic domain, users can define the overap-
proximative system model ˜f(·). The symbolic modeling is
implemented through the framework Pyomo [38], [39]. The
reasoning behind choosing Pyomo over a more generic sym-
bolic library is that the resulting models can readily be used
in optimization problems. We would like to highlight that
Pyomo can represent arbitrary nonlinear and mixed-integer
constraints, which makes it possible to model complex dynam-
ics and power flow. The only requirement is that an appropriate
solver is chosen.
After having modeled a scenario in the object domain, the
system is represented by an object tree of entities, with every
entity defining its individual symbolic model. Before running a
simulation, CommonPower automatically aggregates this dis-
tributed symbolic representation into a global symbolic model
in the form of (3). To this end, the object tree is traversed, and
all local symbolic models are added to a hierarchical model
in which the original tree structure is maintained via Pyomo
blocks, as outlined in Algorithm 1. This hierarchical structure
can readily be used for optimization within Pyomo and defines


===== PAGE 5 =====

Algorithm 1Global Model Construction
1:procedureGLOBALMODEL(system,horizon,tau)
2:Set parameters (tau(sample time),horizon)
3:Create empty global Pyomo modelM
4:Create time index setM.t←{0,1,...,horizon/tau}
5:foreach nodeiin system.nodesdo
6:Set node idnidas (parent id.class prefix + index)
7:Create Pyomo blockM.nid
8:Add node variablesx i,u i,w i toM.nid
9:∀t∈M.t:add constraints for ˜fi,˜gi
10:▷see (1a), (1b) (replacingf i,g i with ˜fi,˜gi)
11:foreach child node/devicecofido
12:Recursively add child to model
13:end for
14:end for
15:foreach linelin system.linesdo
16:Set line idlidas (class prefix + random suffix)
17:Create Pyomo blockM.lid
18:end for
19:Add power flow constraints toM ▷(1c)
20:end procedure
the scope of optimal controllers and safeguards in a decentral
control scenario.
For illustration, the model of a simple battery storage system
is presented in Tab. I. Not all listed model elements need to be
manually defined as CommonPower automatically generates
them (see Sec. IV-A). When instantiating an entity object,
the user must configure input and state limits. Furthermore,
parameter values need to be passed to the instance.
A. Modeling Utilities
1) Parameter Initialization:CommonPower automatically
creates parameters determining the initial values of all mod-
eled state variables. To simulate different parameter val-
ues or initial states, users can configure an instance of
ParamInitializerinstead of some fixed value. Built-in
initializers randomly sample values from a given range or loop
through a given list of values on every environment reset.
2) Piece-wise Expressions:Piece-wise expressions are of-
ten useful in power system modeling, e.g., for the approxima-
tion of battery dynamics with piece-wise linear functions [48].
CommonPower models such expressions via mixed-integer
constraints and provides a utility that largely automates the
generation of corresponding auxiliary constraints based on the
big-M method [49]. For example, the battery model in Tab. I
represents the dynamic function
soct+1 =η ssoct +
(
ηcpt ifp t≥0
1
ηdpt otherwise.
This case distinction can be modeled via a binary indicator
variableecthat takes the value one ifp t ≥0and zero
otherwise. In CommonPower, this variable and correspond-
ing constraints can be straightforwardly defined by invok-
ing theMIPExpressionBuilderutility. The resulting
constraints are listed as indicator constraints in Tab. I. The
MIPExpressionBuildersupports the logical operations
≥,>,and,or, andnot.
3) Uncertainties:Users define the symbolic model for the
nominal case. Any defined parameter can then be declared
uncertain on entity instantiation. Inputs from data providers
are assumed to be uncertain as long as the forecaster does
not explicitly declare perfect foresight. In case forecasters
do not implement a method for obtaining their uncertainty
set, CommonPower assumes the smallest possible hyperbox
enclosing the forecast and the true value.
For example, consider the use case of simulating a battery
with CommonPower using the model from Tab. I. Since,
in reality, the charging efficiency depends on the state of
charge and the temperature [50], one would conduct a system
identification based on experimental data. Assume this has
shown that the value of the charging efficiencyη c lies in the
interval[0.90,0.99]for all relevant conditions. This paramet-
ric uncertainty can be injected into the model from Tab. I
by simply declaringη c as uncertain in the battery instance
configuration. CommonPower automatically detects that the
uncertainty affects the dynamics function and renders the state
of charge uncertain. A more detailed account of how this is
considered when solving the system is given in Sec. V-C.
B. Built-in Entities
CommonPower includes a range of built-in entities, such as
an inflexible load, (curtailable) renewable generators, conven-
tional generators (with rate constraints), energy storage sys-
tems, electric vehicles, and a heat pump. Built-in buses mainly
differ in their modeled cost function, such as maximizing self-
sufficiency, minimizing energy cost, or minimizing energy cost
in conjunction with carbon intensity. CommonPower provides
linearized models that avoid integer variables for many core
entities. Further, built-in buses can be used to represent ex-
ternal grids or to aggregate nodes in an energy community
that minimizes energy cost jointly for all members. The
built-in power flow models represent active power balance,
DC power flow constraints [51, Ch. 6.2.4], and linearized
DistFlow [52]. Users can use the built-in dynamics model for
simulation, implement custom dynamics, inject uncertainties
into the existing models, or create entirely custom models.
C. Forecasting
CommonPower establishes a clear separation between data
sources and forecasters and uses a flexible data provider inter-
face. Each disturbance in the system model is required to be
associated with an instance ofDataProviderthat, at each
new time step, queries aDataSourcefor the current value
and aForecasterfor predicted future values. A simplified
UML class diagram of this structure is provided in Fig. 3.
Built-in data sources are based on Pandas DataFrames [53],
CSV files, or cyclically repeating lists of values. Forecasters
return a prediction for the value of a variable for every time
step within the control horizon while having access to past and
present values of a set of features. Some baseline algorithms
are built-in, such as perfect forecasts, forecasts with smoothed


===== PAGE 6 =====

TABLE I
BATTERY MODEL.MIS A LARGE POSITIVE CONSTANT.
description name type definition configuration constraint expression/domain
active powerpinput manual limitsp∈R
charging indicatorecstate manualec∈{0,1}
costcoststate manualcost∈R
state of chargesocstate manual limitssoc∈R +
0
initial socsoc init parameter automatic valuesoc init∈R +
0
cost of wearρparameter manual valueρ∈R +
0
charge efficiencyη c parameter manual valueη c∈[0,1]
discharge efficiencyη d parameter manual valueη d∈[0,1]
self-dischargeη s parameter manual valueη s∈[0,1]
indicator constraint 1 constraint automatic∀t:p t≥−M(1−ec t)
indicator constraint 2 constraint automatic∀t:p t <Mec t
state initialization constraint automaticsoc 0 =socinit
dynamics function constraint manual∀t∈[0,T−1] :soc t+1 =η ssoct +ηc(ect)pt + 1
ηd (1−ec t)pt
cost function constraint manual∀t:cost t =ρ(ect)pt−ρ(1−ec t)pt
DataProvider
data : DataSource
forecaster : Forecaster
frequency : timedelta
horizon : timedelta
observable_features : Optional[list[str]]
get_date_range() -> list[datetime]
get_variables() -> list[str]
observation_bounds(time: datetime) -> dict[str , list[tuple[float]]]
observe(time: datetime) -> dict[str , np.ndarray]
DataSource
frequency : timedelta
get_date_range() -> list[datetime]
get_limits() -> dict[str, tuple[float, float]]
get_variables() -> list[str]
Forecaster
frequency : timedelta
horizon : timedelta
input_range : tuple[timedelta]
look_back : timedelta
data forecaster
Fig. 3. UML class diagram of the data provider structure.
random noise, or persistence forecasts based on values at
certain times in the past.
To facilitate the study of data-driven forecasting approaches,
CommonPower implements a framework for training, evalu-
ating, and tuning machine learning models utilizing the Ray
Tune library [54]. To obtain a tuned forecasting model on
a given data source, the user only needs to select one of
the built-in models or provide a custom model implementing
PyTorch’snn.Moduleinterface [55] with some parameters
for the tuning pipeline. The built-in models are configurable
standard implementations of a multilayer perceptron (MLP), a
long short-term memory network (LSTM), and a transformer.
The pipeline is highly modular and exposes, among others,
interfaces for splitting train/test/evaluation sets, extracting data
points from the time-series data, and feature/target transforma-
tions. The local saving and loading of trained models, includ-
stage 1
controllers
stage 1
safeguards
symbolic
model
solve (3b)
observesimulate
dynamics
external
simulators
data and
forecasters
system
model
process flow
information flow STAGE 1
stage 2
controller
stage 2
safeguard
simulate
dynamics
solve (3d)
t = t + 1
STAGE 2
COMMONPOWER
CORE
Fig. 4. Simplified visualization of one simulation step, highlighting the
modularity in CommonPower.
ing fitted transformations, is managed by CommonPower.
V. CONTROL
This section details how control and safeguarding are imple-
mented in CommonPower. We outline the modular architecture
and simulation flow, describe the unified interface for het-
erogeneous controllers, and present our framework for robust
safeguarding.
A. High-Level Architecture and Simulation Flow
The architecture of CommonPower is centered around a core
module that interacts with the symbolic model and interfaces
to all other modules, as visualized in Fig. 4. Users can define
completely customized controllers and safeguards that can


===== PAGE 7 =====

make use of the symbolic model of their controlled entities.
Furthermore, adapters to external simulation tools can be
integrated into custom or pre-defined components to execute
external models. The flexible interface for forecasters and data
sources is described in Sec. IV-C. Overall, our architecture
ensures that the symbolic model is consistently managed
by the core module while providing maximum flexibility
with regard to controllers, safeguards, system simulation, and
forecasters.
After the global symbolic model has been synthesized as
described in Sec. IV, the system state is initialized as described
in Sec. IV-A. Each simulation step starts with data sources
and forecasters providing values for disturbances, which are
updated in the symbolic model. Next, the controllers of stage 1
(see Sec. III) are queried for their inputs, which are, if
necessary, adjusted by safeguards. All unmodeled dynamics
are executed in the ensuing step, possibly integrating external
simulation tools. Afterwards, CommonPower solves (3b) for
all free variables, i.e., algebraic variables, and states with
dynamics that adhere to the symbolic model. This concludes
stage 1. In stage 2, balancing assets are dispatched, following
the same process as stage 1.
B. Unified Control Approach
To enable both the deployment and the training of single-
agent and multi-agent systems with heterogeneous controllers,
CommonPower offers one unified interface based on the
gymnasium API [34], commonly referred to as anenvironment.
Developing our own interface was necessary because no stan-
dard environment representation has emerged for multi-agent
RL thus far. We, therefore, have an internal environment repre-
sentation and useWrapperclasses to adapt to representations
used by the respective RL libraries, such as StableBaselines
[56] or MAPPO [47]. Our interface realizes the interaction
of any control algorithm with the underlying power system.
If RL-based controllers are employed, the user can either
directly deploy pre-trained policies or train the policies using
CommonPower. To use other RL libraries than the above-
specified, users can implement a customRunnerclass that
handles configuration and instantiation of the training process.
Fig. 5 visualizes how our interface handles heterogeneous
control structures during training and deployment. It first sep-
arates the controllers into RL-based and non-RL controllers.
Before training starts, the external RL algorithm has to instan-
tiate one policy for each RL controller. Our interface utilizes
the system model to automatically extract the observation
and action space for each controller. Please note that while
CommonPower supports both discrete and continuous actions,
the gymnasium API currently does not support hybrid action
spaces. Once training starts, the RL algorithm samples actions
from each policy. These can be corrected by the safeguard of
the respective controller if required, as described in Sec. V-D.
Our interface then collects the actions from all non-RL con-
trollers. The rewards for the RL algorithm are computed for
each agent based on the cost function of the controlled entities
and the penalty incurred by the safeguarding, as described
in Sec. V-D. Finally, observations are obtained by combining
Gymnasium Environment
Non-RL Controller
Safe Actions
simulate 
system
Observations
Rewards
RL Controller
Safeguard
Action
Policy
Penalty
solve 
(3b),(3d)
observe
Costs
RL Algorithm
Policy
External CommonPower Training
Deployment
Fig. 5. Control flow during training and deployment in CommonPower.
states and forecasts. Storing and loading the trained policies is
handled automatically by CommonPower. During deployment,
the same interface can be used to simulate the system with the
RL-based and the non-RL controllers.
C. Robustly Safe Control
We follow an approach that establishes safety by directly in-
cluding additional constraints in the control problem (3). While
this is a computationally efficient strategy, it restricts ˜f(·)
and˜g(·)to input-switched piece-wise continuous functions
with piece-wise sign-stable Jacobian, as mentioned in Sec. II.
This represents a special case of mixed-monotone functions,
for which the reachable set from an uncertainty hypercube
can be overapproximated by evaluating the function at two
specific vertices of the uncertainty hypercube [57, Prop. 1],
establishing a lower and an upper bound for the state trajectory.
Note that this restriction is always fulfilled by any piece-wise
linear function and by a large range of device models from
the literature. For general non-linear models, approaches such
as conservative linearization [45], [46] can be used to obtain
overapproximative linear models.
The uncertainty in the cost function is handled based on
scenarios. To this end, we consider every vertex of the uncer-
tainty hypercube of disturbances that are only present in the
cost function in addition to the bounds of the state trajectory.
Instances of the built-in classRobustCostinclude either
the cost of the nominal scenario only, the worst-case scenario
only, or a weighted average of all scenarios.
D. RL Safeguarding Framework
Through its modular architecture, CommonPower enables
the integration of various safeguarding approaches, for exam-
ple, using Lyapunov stability theory [11] or barrier functions
[12]. However, leveraging our symbolic system representation
makes it possible to automate the synthesis of safeguards that


===== PAGE 8 =====

are a generalized form of the predictive safety filter from [58].
Specifically, the safeguards find a safe actionu ℓ
t based on the
proposed actiona ℓ
t of RL agentℓby solving
uℓ
t = argmin
uℓ
t
ϕ(uℓ
t,aℓ
t)
s.t. (3b),
(4)
whereϕ(u ℓ
t,aℓ
t)is a cost function. Built-in classes of
Safeguardimplement two common strategies. With
ϕ(uℓ
t,aℓ
t) =∥u ℓ
t−aℓ
t∥2, the approach is commonly called ac-
tion projection [59, Eq. (12)]. In contrast, withϕ(u ℓ
t,aℓ
t) = 0,
we obtain random actions with the solver initialization as the
source of randomness. This is an example of so-called action
replacement [15, Sec. 2.1]. We refer the reader to the study in
[15] for additional theoretical background and an experimental
evaluation of different model-based safeguarding approaches.
We make the standard assumption of well-posedness of our
problem, implying the existence of safe actions. To relax this
assumption, one could implement a custom safeguard with a
fallback action such as load shedding. However, the question
of whether we can always find safe actions in polynomial
time is challenging, since there exists no method to do so for
general nonlinear problems. For QPs with a convex objective
function, as in the case of projection, we can only guarantee
this if the constraints define a convex feasible set. This can
be achieved by using linearized system dynamics as well as
linear power flow models or convex inner approximations of
the power flow feasible set [60], [61].
When using safety filtering during RL training, the behavior
policy used to gather data differs from the target policy
that is being learned. Normally, a policy is updated based
on a batch of tuples(o ℓ
t,aℓ
t,oℓ
t+1,rℓ
t). When a correction
ofa ℓ
t becomes necessary, this tuple could be changed to
(oℓ
t,uℓ
t,oℓ
t+1,rℓ
t)which features the safe action and the reward
obtained from applying this action. However, this would mean
updating the policy with actions that do not stem from the most
recent policy, which is an expected procedure for off-policy
algorithms but can be problematic for on-policy algorithms
[15]. Instead, we add an adaption penalty to the reward
˜rℓ
t =R ℓ(oℓ
t,uℓ
t,oℓ
t+1) +Rℓ,pen(aℓ
t,uℓ
t)(5)
such that the tuple used for learning is(o ℓ
t,aℓ
t,oℓ
t+1,˜rℓ
t).
This penalty informs the agent about the intervention of the
safeguard. CommonPower includes two built-in implementa-
tions of thisSafetyPenalty; one represents the Euclidean
distance between action and safe input, and the other is a
configurable constant penalty if the action was adjusted.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
We present four experiments that demonstrate the capabili-
ties and illustrate potential research directions that are enabled
by the unique features of CommonPower and could not have
been readily realized with any existing tool. All experiments
were conducted on an Intel Core i9-14900K.
0
2
4
Power (kW)
R-Nom
R-Weight
R-Worst
Non-robust
20
20.5
21
T in (◦C)
01-21 00:00 01-21 12:00 01-22 00:00 01-22 12:00 01-23 00:00
−10
−5
0
Time
T out (◦C)
Bounds
Predicted
Actual
Fig. 6. Comparison of robust and non-robust model predictive control for a
household featuring a heat pump and a battery storage system.
A. Importance of Robust Safeguarding
For the first two experiments, we study a building manage-
ment task, where the goal is to control the power set points of a
heat pump and a battery storage system so that the electricity
cost of the building is minimized while the temperature is
kept close to a chosen set point. Designing a safe controller
for this task is challenging because of the inertia of the indoor
temperature.
The building has an inflexible active power consumption
that always has to be satisfied, and a photovoltaic generator.
We model the battery dynamics as in Tab. I withη s = 0and
ηc =η d = 1.0. The dynamic equations for the heat pump are
taken from [62]. As the ground truth data for the PV generation
and active power consumption, we use the Simbench [63]
dataset1-LV-rural2–1-sw 3. For the outdoor temperature and
the coefficient of performance of the heat pump, we use the
When2Heat dataset [64].
We first show the necessity of utilizing the robust safe-
guarding described in Sec. V-C. To this end, we simulate
the above-described system for48hours with a time interval
of one hour. We limit the indoor temperature to the interval
T in ∈[20 ◦C,22◦C]with the target indoor temperature set
to21◦C. The outdoor temperatureT out is predicted using the
values from the previous day.
Fig. 6 compares a naive optimal control approach to robust
optimal control with the three different built-in cost functions:
the nominal cost for the realized scenario, a weighted sum
of all scenarios, and the cost for the worst-case scenario.
Since the outdoor temperature is overestimated for a long
period of time, the naive optimal controller is not able to
keep the indoor temperature within the desired range, and
the simulation fails after roughly 30 time steps. In contrast,
all robust controllers can keep the system within the limits.
The controller optimizing the worst-case cost results in the
smallest deviation from the desired temperature set point. The
overall cost is the highest when using the weighted sum of all
scenarios (58.86) and lowest using the nominal cost (58.22).
3https://simbench.de/de/datensaetze


===== PAGE 9 =====

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Price ( €)
20.98
21
T in (◦C)
00:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 24:00
2
4
6
Time
SoC (kWh)
PPO
IPPO
MAPPO
Fig. 7. Centralized (PPO) and decentralized control (IPPO, MAPPO) under
time-of-use electricity prices for a household featuring a heat pump and a
battery storage system.
B. Comparison of Single- and Multi-agent RL
The task described in Sec. VI-A can be solved using a
centralized control structure – one controller for both heat
pump and battery – or a decentralized one. Centralized control,
realized with single-agent RL, has the advantage of having
access to the full observation space. On the other hand, with
multi-agent RL, the task of each individual agent is less
complex. CommonPower enables an effortless comparison of
both approaches for a given task.
The system setup is very similar to the one described in Sec.
VI-A. We relax the constraints for the indoor temperature such
thatT in∈[18◦C,24◦C]. To reduce noise, we employ perfect
forecasts for all quantities in this experiment. Finally, we use
time-of-use electricity prices with the profile shown in Fig. 7.
During single-agent RL training, we minimize the deviation
of the indoor temperature from the set pointT set, the battery
degradation, and the electricity cost, realized by
rt =−(p grid
t φt +c comfort(T in−T set)2 +c degrad|pbattery
t |).
Here,p grid is the power the household has to draw from
the external grid,p battery is the charge/discharge power of
the battery,φis the electricity price, andc comfort,c degrad
are weighting factors for the comfort cost and the bat-
tery degradation cost. The observation of the agent is
ot =
h
soc,p PV
[·],p load
[·] ,T in,z hp,T out
[·] ,φ [·]
i
, wherez hp represents
the internal states of the heat pump andp PV,p load are the power
of the PV array and the non-controllable load, respectively.
For multi-agent RL, we split the electricity cost between the
agent controlling the battery and the one controlling the heat
pump, realized by
rbattery
t =−
1
2pgrid
t φt +c degrad|pbattery
t |

,
rheatpump
t =−
1
2pgrid
t φt +c comfort(T in−T set)2

.
This means that the reward for the individual agent is non-
stationary as it also depends on the actions of the other agent.
The agents receive
obattery
t =
h
soc,p PV
[·],p load
[·] ,T in,T out
[·] ,φ [·]
i
,
oheatpump
t =
h
T in,z hp,T out
[·] ,φ [·]
i
as observations, respectively.
We compare the performance of PPO [65] as a single-agent
RL algorithm with the two multi-agent algorithms IPPO [66]
and MAPPO [47] on a given day. The difference between
the two latter algorithms lies in the observation space of the
critic used to guide the policy during training: In MAPPO,
it is conditioned on the union of the individual observations
as a means for alleviating non-stationarity. We compare safe
training using action projection and a proportional penalty
rℓ,pen
t = 10∥a ℓ
t−u ℓ
t∥to safe training without a penalty
to analyze how the penalty affects performance across the
different algorithms. Furthermore, we report the results for
training without a safeguard (unsafe). Here, we cannot employ
proportional penalties as safe actions are not computed. There-
fore, to inform the agent about constraint violations, we use
a constant penaltyr ℓ,pen
t =−50. Training is performed over
data from one day with constant initial states of the battery and
the heat pump to limit training times. During deployment, we
perturb the initial state of the battery to achieve a different data
distribution compared to training. For all algorithms, we first
perform hyperparameter tuning over 100 trials for the batch
size, the learning rate, and the initial standard deviation, and
then use the best hyperparameters to train on five different
random seeds.
Tab. II shows that the agents trained with a projection
safeguard and a proportional penalty consistently deliver the
best average performance during deployment. MAPPO de-
livers the best overall result, which can be attributed to the
reduced complexity in the action space compared to PPO and
the measures against non-stationarity explained above. Fig. 7
shows the best-performing seed for each approach. We see that
all learn to exploit low-level prices to charge the battery and
pre-heat the building. Please note that unsafe training leads
to failures during deployment for all algorithms, as shown
in Tab. II, highlighting the necessity of using a safeguard.
This also justifies the computational overhead incurred by the
safeguarding, which constitutes13.5%of the training time on
average.
C. Effects of Forecaster Choice on Dispatch Cost
The topology of our test system is based on theKerber
Landnetz Kabel 2network taken from the pandapower library
[35]. The network has 30 buses, 14 of which are households,
and is connected to the external grid via a substation. The
topology is imported from pandapower and all parameters are
maintained, e.g., line admittances. We use the DC power flow
model. During import, devices are added to households in a
stochastic fashion. Each household has an inflexible load with
a probability of 100%, a battery with a probability of 50%,
and a photovoltaic generator with a probability of 50%. The


===== PAGE 10 =====

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF SINGLE-AGENTRL (PPO)AND MULTI-AGENTRL (IPPO, MAPPO).
PPO IPPO MAPPO
Safe Safe-Pen Unsafe Safe Safe-Pen Unsafe Safe Safe-Pen Unsafe
Training
InterventionsMean15,238 2,751n.a.23,140 1,665n.a.24,862 1,664n.a.
Safeguard timeMean14.3% 14.5%n.a.12.8% 13.3%n.a.13.0% 13.3%n.a.
Deployment
CostsMin9.21 8.59 9.36 8.77 8.20 8.99 8.81 8.24 9.03
Max10.05 9.82 9.56 9.57 9.66 8.99 9.22 9.01 11.12
Mean9.61 9.04 9.46 9.10 8.94 8.99 9.01 8.71 10.08
Failed seeds- 0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 3
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
0.05
0.1
0.15
Trial
RMSE
Objective Value
Best Value
(a) LSTM architecture
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
0.171
0.172
0.173
0.174
Trial
RMSE (b) Transformer architecture
Fig. 8. Root mean squared error (RMSE) over the test data set of active power consumption for 100 hyperparameter trials.
ground truth generation/load profiles are again based on the
Simbench dataset1-LV-rural2–1-sw.
We simulate the system described above with a centralized
optimal controller over one year. The forecast horizon of the
optimal controller is set to 12 hours with a frequency of one
hour. We assume a constant buying (0.37 C/kWh) and selling
(0.08 C/kWh) price.
Our goal is to analyze the effect of forecast accuracy on
the yearly electricity cost of the system. For simplicity, we
choose perfect forecasts for the photovoltaic generation. The
only uncertainty thus stems from the forecasts for the active
power consumed by each household. They are provided by
either a pre-trained LSTM model or a pre-trained transformer.
We use CommonPower to first tune hyperparameters (batch
size, dropout rate, number of layers, learning rate, lookback
window) and then train the forecasting model with the identi-
fied set of hyperparameters. The tuning is performed over 100
trials with an 80-20 split for training and validation data. Fig. 8
shows the spread of the root mean squared error used as the
optimization objective during tuning. While the transformer
architecture seems to be more robust, the LSTM delivers
substantially better forecasting accuracy during training. How-
ever, the controller using the LSTM forecasts obtains a higher
yearly electricity cost (4220.51 C) than the one using the
forecasts from the transformer (4206.23 C). Fig. 9 visualizes
the error distributions of the two forecasters. We observe that
the transformer-based forecaster always predicts very similar
values over the forecast horizon, leading to overestimating
the anticipated load in most cases. As a result, the controller
has to be more conservative when allocating resources, which
explains the improved closed-loop performance.
D. Influence of Modeling Choices on Computation Time
This experiment investigates the computation time of a
centralized MPC with perfect forecasts across three different
network sizes, two power flow models, and linear as well as
piecewise-linear ESS models. The setup is identical to Sec.
VI-C except that every household is assigned an inflexible
load, photovoltaic generation, and a battery storage system.
We simulate one day and average the computation time over
all time steps. The results are listed in Tab. III.
We can observe that under power balance constraints, the
computation time scales approximately linearly with the net-
work size. The use of a piecewise-linear ESS model increases
the computation time by roughly 50%. Under LinDistFlow
constraints, we obtain significantly higher computation times
with the piecewise-linear ESS model. On a technical level,
this is due to the fact that the presolve routine of the solver
cannot eliminate as many variables as under power balance
constraints, since they are more closely coupled. For refer-
ence, the optimization problem for the largest network has
24567 continuous variables, 1898 binary variables, and 1752
quadratic objective terms. Please note that this is only an
exemplary measurement and cannot be generalized, since the
time to solve mixed integer programs depends strongly on the
problem structure and several solver parameters.
VII. CONCLUSION
We introduce CommonPower, a comprehensive toolbox
designed as a one-stop-shop solution for the modeling and
simulation of safe controllers in smart grids. Leveraging
a symbolic representation of the system, model-based RL
safeguards as well as robust model predictive controllers are


===== PAGE 11 =====

2 4 6 8 10 12
Forecast Horizon
−0.25
0.00
0.25
Error
(a) LSTM architecture
2 4 6 8 10 12
Forecast Horizon
−0.25
0.00
0.25
Error (b) Transformer architecture
Fig. 9. Error distribution during deployment between the true and the forecasted load for each time step in the forecast horizon. The results are averaged
over all households.
TABLE III
SIMULATION TIME[S]PER TIME STEP.
Buses/Households 30/14 116/57 294/146
power balance + linear ESS 0.13 0.46 1.33
power balance + piecewise-linear ESS 0.17 0.75 2.00
LinDistFlow + linear ESS 0.17 0.75 2.17
LinDistFlow + piecewise-linear ESS 3.63 5.58 12.38
automatically derived, significantly accelerating case study
design for practitioners. CommonPower features a flexible
coalition-based approach, admitting the complex distributed
control structures of modern and future smart grids. The
modular software architecture exposes, among others, unified
interfaces for single-agent and multi-agent RL algorithms,
external simulation tools, data sources, and machine-learning-
based forecasting models. Due to this high amount of flex-
ibility, CommonPower can easily be integrated into existing
projects, providing a common foundation for a vast variety of
use cases and paving the way for increased real-world adoption
of data-driven smart grid control. Planned extensions are the
implementation of further entity models, hierarchical control,
contingency constraints, further safeguarding approaches, and
explicit modeling of energy trading.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Chen, G. Qu, Y . Tang, S. Low, and N. Li, “Reinforcement learning
for selective key applications in power systems: Recent advances and
future challenges,”IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 2935–2958, 2022.
[2] J. R. V ´azquez-Canteli, J. K ¨ampf, G. Henze, and Z. Nagy, “CityLearn
v1.0: An OpenAI gym environment for demand response with deep
reinforcement learning,” inProceedings of the 6th ACM International
Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Trans-
portation, pp. 356–357, 2019.
[3] A. Pigott, C. Crozier, K. Baker, and Z. Nagy, “GridLearn: Multiagent
reinforcement learning for grid-aware building energy management,”
Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 213, 2022. article no. 108521.
[4] D. Biagioni, X. Zhang, D. Wald, D. Vaidhynathan, R. Chintala, J. King,
and A. S. Zamzam, “PowerGridworld: A framework for multi-agent
reinforcement learning in power systems,” inProceedings of the 13th
ACM International Conference on Future Energy Systems, pp. 565–570,
2022.
[5] J. da Silva Andr ´e, E. Stai, O. Stanojev, and G. Hug, “Battery control with
lookahead constraints in distribution grids using reinforcement learning,”
Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 211, 2022. article no. 108551.
[6] X. Zhang, A. T. Eseye, B. Knueven, and W. Jones, “Restoring distribu-
tion system under renewable uncertainty using reinforcement learning,”
inIEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and
Computing Technologies for Smart Grids, pp. 1–6, 2020.
[7] J. Garc ´ıa, Fern, and o Fern ´andez, “A comprehensive survey on safe
reinforcement learning,”Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16,
no. 42, pp. 1437–1480, 2015.
[8] S. Gu, L. Yang, Y . Du, G. Chen, F. Walter, J. Wang, and A. Knoll, “A
review of safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theories, and applica-
tions,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 11216–11235, 2024.
[9] B. K ¨onighofer, R. Bloem, R. Ehlers, and C. Pek,Correct-by-
Construction Runtime Enforcement in AI – A Survey, pp. 650–663.
Springer Nature Switzerland, 2022.
[10] V .-H. Bui, S. Mohammadi, S. Das, A. Hussain, G. V . Hollweg, and
W. Su, “A critical review of safe reinforcement learning strategies
in power and energy systems,”Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 143, 2025. article no. 110091.
[11] W. Cui, J. Li, and B. Zhang, “Decentralized safe reinforcement learning
for inverter-based voltage control,”Electric Power Systems Research,
vol. 211, 2022. article no. 108609.
[12] T. L. Vu, S. Mukherjee, T. Yin, R. Huang, J. Tan, and Q. Huang, “Safe
reinforcement learning for emergency load shedding of power systems,”
in2021 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM),
pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2021.
[13] J. R. Vazquez-Canteli, G. Henze, and Z. Nagy, “MARLISA: Multi-
agent reinforcement learning with iterative sequential action selection for
load shaping of grid-interactive connected buildings,” inProceedings of
the 7th ACM International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient
Buildings, Cities, and Transportation, pp. 170–179, 2020.
[14] S. Bahrami, Y . C. Chen, and V . W. Wong, “Deep reinforcement learning
for demand response in distribution networks,”IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1496–1506, 2020.
[15] H. Krasowski, J. Thumm, M. M ¨uller, L. Sch ¨afer, X. Wang, and M. Al-
thoff, “Provably safe reinforcement learning: Conceptual analysis, sur-
vey, and benchmarking,”Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
2023.
[16] H. Markgraf and M. Althoff, “Safe multi-agent reinforcement learning
for price-based demand response,” inIEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies Europe, pp. 1–6, 2023.
[17] M. Uddin, H. Mo, D. Dong, S. Elsawah, J. Zhu, and J. M. Guerrero,
“Microgrids: A review, outstanding issues and future trends,”Energy
Strategy Reviews, vol. 49, 2023. article no. 101127.
[18] F. S. Al-Ismail, “DC microgrid planning, operation, and control: A
comprehensive review,”IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 36154–36172, 2021.
[19] K. Amasyali and N. M. El-Gohary, “A review of data-driven building
energy consumption prediction studies,”Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 81, pp. 1192–1205, 2018.
[20] A. M. Foley, P. G. Leahy, A. Marvuglia, and E. J. McKeogh, “Cur-
rent methods and advances in forecasting of wind power generation,”
Renewable Energy, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2012.
[21] Y . Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter
data analytics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,”IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3125–3148, 2019.
[22] U. K. Das, K. S. Tey, M. Seyedmahmoudian, S. Mekhilef, M. Y . I.
Idris, W. Van Deventer, B. Horan, and A. Stojcevski, “Forecasting
of photovoltaic power generation and model optimization: A review,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 81, pp. 912–928, 2018.
[23] H. Cui and Y . Zhang, “Andes gym: A versatile environment for deep
reinforcement learning in power systems,” inIEEE Power & Energy
Society General Meeting, pp. 01–05, 2022.


===== PAGE 12 =====

[24] H. Cui, F. Li, and K. Tomsovic, “Hybrid symbolic-numeric framework
for power system modeling and analysis,”IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 1373–1384, 2020.
[25] R. Henry and D. Ernst, “Gym-ANM: Open-source software to leverage
reinforcement learning for power system management in research and
education,”Software Impacts, vol. 9, 2021. article no. 100092.
[26] R. Henry and D. Ernst, “Gym-ANM: Reinforcement learning environ-
ments for active network management tasks in electricity distribution
systems,”Energy and AI, vol. 5, 2021. article no. 100092.
[27] A. Kelly, A. O’Sullivan, P. de Mars, and A. Marot, “Reinforce-
ment learning for electricity network operation,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.07339, 2020.
[28] A. Marot, B. Donnot, G. Dulac-Arnold, A. Kelly, A. O’Sullivan,
J. Viebahn, M. Awad, I. Guyon, P. Panciatici, and C. Romero, “Learning
to run a power network challenge: a retrospective analysis,” inPro-
ceedings of the NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demonstration Track,
vol. 133 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 112–132,
2021.
[29] T.-H. Fan, X. Y . Lee, and Y . Wang, “PowerGym: A reinforcement
learning environment for volt-var control in power distribution systems,”
inProceedings of The 4th Annual Learning for Dynamics and Control
Conference, vol. 168 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pp. 21–33, 2022.
[30] G. Henri, T. Levent, A. Halev, R. Alami, and P. Cordier, “pymgrid: An
open-source python microgrid simulator for applied artificial intelligence
research,” inNeurIPS Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning, 2020.
[31] Q. Huang, R. Huang, W. Hao, J. Tan, R. Fan, and Z. Huang, “Adaptive
power system emergency control using deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1171–1182, 2019.
[32] C. Yeh, V . Li, R. Datta, J. Arroyo, N. Christianson, C. Zhang, Y . Chen,
M. Hosseini, A. Golmohammadi, Y . Shi, Y . Yue, and A. Wierman, “Sus-
tainGym: Reinforcement learning environments for sustainable energy
systems,” in37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
[33] K. Nweye, K. Kaspar, G. Buscemi, T. Fonseca, G. Pinto, D. Ghose,
S. Duddukuru, P. Pratapa, H. Li, J. Mohammadi, L. L. Ferreira,
T. Hong, M. Ouf, A. Capozzoli, and Z. N. and, “CityLearn v2: energy-
flexible, resilient, occupant-centric, and carbon-aware management of
grid-interactive communities,”Journal of Building Performance Simu-
lation, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 17–38, 2025.
[34] M. Towers, J. K. Terry, A. Kwiatkowski, J. U. Balis, G. d. Cola,
T. Deleu, M. Goul ˜ao, A. Kallinteris, A. KG, M. Krimmel, R. Perez-
Vicente, A. Pierr ´e, S. Schulhoff, J. J. Tai, A. T. J. Shen, and O. G.
Younis, “Gymnasium.” https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8269265, 2023.
[35] L. Thurner, A. Scheidler, F. Sch ¨afer, J. Menke, J. Dollichon, F. Meier,
S. Meinecke, and M. Braun, “pandapower — an open-source python tool
for convenient modeling, analysis, and optimization of electric power
systems,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 6510–
6521, 2018.
[36] H. Markgraf, M. Eichelbeck, D. Cappey, S. Demirt ¨urk, Y . Schattschnei-
der, and M. Althoff, “PyTupli: A scalable infrastructure for col-
laborative offline reinforcement learning projects,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.16754, 2025.
[37] H. Roehm, J. Oehlerking, M. Woehrle, and M. Althoff, “Model con-
formance for cyber-physical systems: A survey,”ACM Transactions on
Cyber-Physical Systems, vol. 3, no. 3, 2019. article no. 30.
[38] W. E. Hart, J.-P. Watson, and D. L. Woodruff, “Pyomo: modeling and
solving mathematical programs in python,”Mathematical Programming
Computation, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 219–260, 2011.
[39] M. L. Bynum, G. A. Hackebeil, W. E. Hart, C. D. Laird, B. L. Nicholson,
J. D. Siirola, J.-P. Watson, and D. L. Woodruff,Pyomo — Optimization
Modeling in Python, vol. 67. Springer Science & Business Media,
third ed., 2021.
[40] S. B. Liu, B. Sch ¨urmann, and M. Althoff, “Guarantees for real robotic
systems: Unifying formal controller synthesis and reachset-conformant
identification,”IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 3776–
3790, 2023.
[41] F. Gruber and M. Althoff, “Scalable robust safety filter with unknown
disturbance set,”IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 68,
no. 12, pp. 7756–7770, 2023.
[42] L. L ¨utzow and M. Althoff, “Scalable reachset-conformant identification
of linear systems,”IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 8, pp. 520–525,
2024.
[43] L. Sch ¨afer, F. Gruber, and M. Althoff, “Scalable computation of robust
control invariant sets of nonlinear systems,”IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 755–770, 2024.
[44] B. Sch ¨urmann, N. Kochdumper, and M. Althoff, “Reachset model
predictive control for disturbed nonlinear systems,” inIEEE Conference
on Decision and Control, pp. 3463–3470, 2018.
[45] M. Althoff and B. H. Krogh, “Reachability analysis of nonlinear
differential-algebraic systems,”IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con-
trol, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 371–383, 2014.
[46] M. Althoff, O. Stursberg, and M. Buss, “Reachability analysis of nonlin-
ear systems with uncertain parameters using conservative linearization,”
in47th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 4042–4048,
2008.
[47] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y . Wang, A. Bayen, and Y . Wu,
“The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative, multi-agent games,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 24611–
24624, 2022.
[48] H. Pand ˇzi´c and V . Bobanac, “An accurate charging model of battery
energy storage,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 34, no. 2,
pp. 1416–1426, 2018.
[49] G. G. Brown and R. F. Dell, “Formulating integer linear programs: A
rogues’ gallery,”INFORMS Transactions on Education, vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 153–159, 2007.
[50] X. Su, B. Sun, J. Wang, H. Ruan, W. Zhang, and Y . Bao, “Experimental
study on charging energy efficiency of lithium-ion battery under different
charging stress,”Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 68, 2023. article no.
107793.
[51] P. Schavemaker and L. Van der Sluis,Electrical power system essentials.
John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[52] M. Baran and F. Wu, “Optimal sizing of capacitors placed on a radial
distribution system,”IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 735–743, 1989.
[53] W. McKinney, “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python,”
inProceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pp. 56 – 61,
2010.
[54] R. Liaw, E. Liang, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica,
“Tune: A research platform for distributed model selection and training,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05118, 2018.
[55] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga,et al., “PyTorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,”Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019. article no. 721.
[56] A. Raffin, A. Hill, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, M. Ernestus, and N. Dor-
mann, “Stable-Baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementa-
tions,”Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 22, no. 268, pp. 1–8,
2021.
[57] S. Coogan and M. Arcak, “Efficient finite abstraction of mixed monotone
systems,” inProceedings of the 18th International Conference on Hybrid
Systems: Computation and Control, pp. 58–67, 2015.
[58] K. P. Wabersich and M. N. Zeilinger, “A predictive safety filter for
learning-based control of constrained nonlinear dynamical systems,”
Automatica, vol. 129, 2021. article no. 109597.
[59] S. Gros, M. Zanon, and A. Bemporad, “Safe reinforcement learning
via projection on a safe set: How to achieve optimality?,”IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 8076–8081, 2020.
[60] D. Lee, H. D. Nguyen, K. Dvijotham, and K. Turitsyn, “Convex
restriction of power flow feasibility sets,”IEEE Transactions on Control
of Network Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1235–1245, 2019.
[61] D. Lee, K. Turitsyn, D. K. Molzahn, and L. A. Roald, “Robust AC
optimal power flow with robust convex restriction,”IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 4953–4966, 2021.
[62] M. A. Bianchi,Adaptive modellbasierte pr ¨adiktive Regelung einer
Kleinw¨armepumpenanlage. PhD thesis, Eidgen ¨ossische Technische
Hochschule Z ¨urich, 2006.
[63] S. Meinecke, D. Sarajli ´c, S. R. Drauz, A. Klettke, L.-P. Lauven,
C. Rehtanz, A. Moser, and M. Braun, “SimBench — a benchmark
dataset of electric power systems to compare innovative solutions based
on power flow analysis,”Energies, vol. 13, no. 12, 2020. article no.
3290.
[64] O. Ruhnau, L. Hirth, and A. Praktiknjo, “Time series of heat demand
and heat pump efficiency for energy system modeling,”Scientific data,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2019.
[65] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[66] C. S. de Witt, T. Gupta, D. Makoviichuk, V . Makoviychuk, P. H. S.
Torr, M. Sun, and S. Whiteson, “Is independent learning all you need in
the starcraft multi-agent challenge?,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533,
2020.
