

===== PAGE 1 =====

PowerGridworld: A Framework for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning in Power Systems
David Biagioni, Xiangyu Zhang, Dylan Wald, Deepthi Vaidhynathan,
Rohit Chintala, Jennifer King, Ahmed S. Zamzam
Abstract—We present the PowerGridworld software package
to provide users with a lightweight, modular, and customizable
framework for creating power-systems-focused, multi-agent Gym
environments that readily integrate with existing training frame-
works for reinforcement learning (RL). Although many frame-
works exist for training multi-agent RL (MARL) policies, none
can rapidly prototype and develop the environments themselves,
especially in the context of heterogeneous (composite, multi-
device) power systems where power ﬂow solutions are required to
deﬁne grid-level variables and costs. PowerGridworld is an open-
source software package that helps to ﬁll this gap. To highlight
PowerGridworld’s key features, we present two case studies
and demonstrate learning MARL policies using both OpenAI’s
multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) and
RLLib’s proximal policy optimization (PPO) algorithms. In both
cases, at least some subset of agents incorporates elements of the
power ﬂow solution at each time step as part of their reward
(negative cost) structures.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Energy Systems
With the increased controllability of power consumption and
generation at the edge of modern power systems, devising cen-
tralized control approaches to manage ﬂexible devices within
these systems is becoming nearly impossible. In particular,
the dynamical models of these interconnected systems present
considerable nonlinearities, which challenges the applicability
of classical control methods. In addition, the conﬂicting opera-
tional costs/objectives of heterogeneous devices often obstruct
the formulation of a system-wide operational objective. Thus,
decentralized, data-driven control approaches, where edge
controllers utilize data to derive effective local control policies,
provide a viable pathway to realizing the resilient and efﬁcient
operation of future energy systems.
Reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have shown great
potential in several power systems control and load man-
agement tasks [1]–[4]. In addition, multi-agent RL (MARL)
approaches have advanced and have been applied in many
All authors are with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
Golden, CO 80401, USA. Corresponding author: D. Biagioni
(dave.biagioni@nrel.gov). This work was authored by the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), operated by Alliance for Sustainable
Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract
No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. This work was supported by the Laboratory
Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program at NREL. The views
expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE
or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by
accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government
retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or
reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S.
Government purposes.
Fig. 1. PowerGridworld architecture for an N-agent environment comprised
of both single-component agents (Agent 1) and multi-component agents,
which can be added in any number and combination. Given a base system load
and the agents’ individual power proﬁles, a power ﬂow solution is computed
at each control step and may be used to update the agents’ states and rewards.
complex systems, including games [5] and autonomous driving
[6]. Recently, MARL approaches have also found applications
in the power systems domain, with an emphasis on voltage
regulation problems [7]–[9]. These applications utilize the
capabilities of MARL to devise local control policies without
any knowledge of the models of the underlying complex
systems. However, due to the signiﬁcant focus on applying
MARL in power system decentralized control tasks, there has
been no standardized RL test environment that supports the
development of heterogeneous power system components and
the deployment of off-the-shelf MARL approaches.
B. Related Software
Table I summarizes the features of MARL frameworks for
power systems.
1) General MARL Framework: The development of MARL
is relatively new compared to its single-agent counterpart,
and there is currently no commonly and widely used MARL
framework. PettingZoo [10], a Python library, has a goal
of developing a universal application programming interface
(API) for formulating MARL problems, as OpenAI Gym [11]
did for single-agent RL problems. However, because the key
advantages of PettingZoo—namely, an efﬁcient formulation
suitable for the turn-based games and an ability to handle
arXiv:2111.05969v1  [cs.LG]  10 Nov 2021


===== PAGE 2 =====

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF SOFTWARE FEATURES FOR MARL ENVIRONMENTS FOR POWER SYSTEMS .
Package Power Systems
Application
Agent
Customization
Composable
Agents
Control Step MARL Training Interfaces
PettingZoo None Unlimited No User-deﬁned RLLib, OpenAI
CityLearn Demand response Buildings and
subsystems
No 1-hour Package-speciﬁc
GridLearn Demand response,
voltage regulation
Buildings and
subsystems
No Sub-hourly Package-speciﬁc
PowerGridworld Any energy manage-
ment/optimization
Unlimited Yes User-deﬁned RLLib, OpenAI
agent creation and death within episodes—are less relevant
to power system control problems, PowerGridworld does not
adopt the PettingZoo APIs at this stage for simplicity.
2) Multi-Agent Energy Systems: CityLearn [12], [13] is
an open-source library aimed at implementing and evaluating
MARL for building demand response and energy coordination.
By design, the heating and cooling demands of buildings in
CityLearn are guaranteed to be satisﬁed, allowing researchers
to focus on energy balance and load shifting for the con-
trol problem. To achieve this, building thermal models and
associated energy demands are precomputed using Energy-
Plus [14], and control actions are limited to active energy
storage decisions rather than those affecting passive (thermal)
mass. CityLearn is intended to provide a benchmark MARL
environment from the standpoint of building demand response
and, as such, it is highly constrained in terms of the types of
agents and models that are available. CityLearn energy models
include buildings, heat pumps, energy storage, and batteries,
while the state and action spaces of the agents themselves
must be constructed from a predeﬁned variable list. Control
steps in CityLearn are restricted to 1-hour resolution, and
grid physics is not modeled. To address this, GridLearn [9]
utilizes the building models provided in CityLearn and extends
its functionality to include power system simulation. The
added power ﬂow model, implemented using pandapower [15],
allows researchers studying decentralized control to consider
both building-side and grid-level objectives. The GridLearn
case study presented in [9] demonstrates that this platform
can be used to train MARL controllers to achieve voltage
regulation objectives in a distribution system by controlling
behind-the-meter resources.
3) MARL Training: While many open-source choices exist
for MARL training, we highlight two of the most popular:
RLLib (multiple algorithms available) and OpenAI’s multi-
agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG). RLLib
[16], [17] is a framework for scalable RL training built on
the Ray Python library [18], and it supports a variety of
training paradigms for single-agent, multi-agent, hierarchi-
cal, and ofﬂine learning. RLLib can be deployed on both
cloud and high performance computing (HPC) systems, and it
provides a number of training “abstractions,” enabling users
to develop custom, distributed RL algorithms. The multi-
agent API in PowerGridworld is derived from RLLib’s own
MultiAgentEnv API and thus is readily integrated into
this framework. OpenAI [19] has played a central role in the
evolution of both theory and software for RL and MARL. In
addition to creating the Gym API, OpenAI released a series
of tutorials and implementations in the mid-2010s that have
continued to hold traction in the RL community, including
the SpinningUp blog 1 and the baselines GitHub repository. 2
The OpenAI implementation [20] of the MADDPG [21] is a
popular choice for MARL with continuous control.
As described in greater detail in Section II-A, PowerGrid-
world makes it easy for users to leverage the implementations
of both RLLib’s and OpenAI’s RL algorithms.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous software pack-
ages exist that enable users to implement arbitrary multi-agent
scenarios with with a power systems focus—in particular,
with the ability to incorporate power ﬂow solutions into
the agents’ observation spaces and rewards. We believe that
PowerGridworld begins to bridge this gap by enabling highly
modular, customizable environments that readily integrate with
open-source, scalable MARL training frameworks such as
RLLib.
II. P OWER GRIDWORLD
A. Description of Software
PowerGridworld is designed to provide users with a
lightweight, modular, and customizable framework for creating
power-systems-focused, multi-agent Gym environments that
readily integrate with existing RL training frameworks. The
purpose of this software, which is available as an open-source
Python package3, is to enable researchers to rapidly prototype
simulators and RL algorithms for power systems applications
at the level of detail of their choice, while also enabling the
use of cloud and HPC via integration with scalable training
libraries such as RLLib [16] and Stable Baselines [22].
1) Architecture: The PowerGridworld design pattern is
based on the OpenAI Gym API, which has become the de
facto standard interface for training RL algorithms. The Gym
API essentially consists of the following two methods:
• reset: Initialize the simulation instance and return an
observation of the initial state space, s0.
• step: For each control step, apply an input control
action, at, and return a a new state space observation,
1https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/
2https://github.com/openai/baselines
3https://github.com/NREL/PowerGridworld


===== PAGE 3 =====

st; a step reward, rt; a termination ﬂag; and any desired
metadata.
A simulator that is wrapped in the Gym API is often referred
to as an environment, and one instance of the simulation is
often called an episode.
The core functionality of the PowerGridworld package is to
extend the Gym API to include multi-agent simulations and to
allow a user to combine environments that simulate individual
devices or subsystems into a single, multi-component agent.
This “plug-and-play” functionality is highly useful in power
systems applications because it enables the user to rapidly
create heterogeneous agents using basic building blocks of
distributed energy resources (DERs).
We illustrate the PowerGridworld architecture in Fig. 1.
Here, the MultiAgentEnv environment (blue) encapsulates
N agents that subclass one of two types:
a) ComponentEnv environments (green), which imple-
ment a single, independent agent. This class is a slight
extension of the OpenAI Gym API.
b) MultiComponentEnv environments (yellow), which
are a composition of component environments. For exam-
ple, AgentN could represent a smart building agent com-
posed of building thermodynamics, photovoltaics (PV),
and battery physics, each implemented as a separate
ComponentEnv.
The multi-agent Gym API can be readily plugged into
an RL training framework such as RLLib (grey), where
agent-level policies (red) are learned. Once the individ-
ual device physics has been implemented according to the
ComponentEnv API, the software automates the creation
of MultiComponentEnv environments. Any number of
ComponentEnv and MultiComponentEnv agents can
then be added to the MultiAgentEnv environment.
2) Power Flow Solver Integration: Another key feature of
PowerGridworld is the integration of a power ﬂow solver
for simulating the grid physics that underlies the multi-agent
environment. Although our examples utilize the open distri-
bution system simulator (OpenDSS) [23] to solve the power
ﬂow on a test feeder, any power ﬂow solver wrapped in the
PowerFlowSolver API can be utilized.
B. Advantages
The advantages of using PowerGridworld over MARL
software packages are as follows. First, the plug-and-play
modularity with a three-tier hierarchy ( cf. Fig. 1) allows
environments to be created from simpler components. Second,
the multi-agent environment design allows both homogeneous
and heterogeneous agent types. Third, the power ﬂow solution
can be used in agent-level states and rewards. Finally, Power-
Gridworld adheres to RLLib’s multi-agent API, with convert-
ers for both CityLearn/GridLearn and OpenAI’s MADDPG
interfaces.
C. Limitations
Next, we list some of the limitations of PowerGridworld.
First, time stepping is synchronous and of ﬁxed frequency.
However, we have a road map for implementing both hi-
erarchical and multi-frequency time stepping. Second, the
communication model is limited. Centralized communication,
whereby the process driving the environment collects and com-
municates variables between agents, is relatively straightfor-
ward to implement using only the Gym API. More advanced
paradigms require custom implementations. Finally, the initial
version of the MultiAgentEnv serializes calls to the agents
(i.e., there is no parallelism).
III. C ASE STUDIES
In this section, we present two examples of how Power-
Gridworld can be used to formulate multi-agent control tasks
in energy systems.
A. Multi-Agent Building Coordination Environment
In the ﬁrst example, we consider three RL agents in a
homogeneous setting. Each agent controls three components
within one building: one HV AC system, one on-site PV
system, and one energy storage (ES) system. Using this setup,
this example demonstrates how to use the PowerGridworld
package to model a learning environment that allows agent
coordination while achieving each agent’s own objective.
To this end, the MARL system is implemented as follows:
1) For each agent/building, the HV AC system needs to be
controlled so that thermal comfort can be realized with
minimal energy consumption. As a result, the HV AC
component reward, ri,HVAC
t , includes penalties for both
thermal discomfort and energy consumption.
2) The PV and ES systems are two additional components
that are controlled by an agent to modify the building’s
net power consumption, but for simplicity, the rewards
related to these two components are set to be zero, i.e.,
ri,PV
t =ri,ES
t = 0.
3) We designed a simple scenario with a sudden PV gen-
eration drop when the system loading level is high. If
all three buildings, which connect to the same bus in the
distribution system, only care about their own objective,
the voltage at the common bus might fall below the
limit, i.e., vcomm < v. As a result, voltage support –
maintaining vcomm≥v – requires the three buildings to
coordinate with one another.
Based on the setup above, at control step t and for agent i,
the total agent reward is
ri
t =ri,agent
t +ri,sys
t (1)
in which ri,agent
t = ri,HVAC
t +ri,PV
t +ri,ES
t is the agent-
level reward andri,sys
t =−λ[max(0,vcomm−v) +max(0,v−
vcomm)]/3 represents the system-level reward, shared evenly
with all three agents. Here, λ is a large number. Through
MARL training, each agent should be able to optimize its own
objective (i.e., keep ri,agent
t low) and also able to work with
other agents to avoid any voltage violation (i.e., keep ri,sys
t
low).


===== PAGE 4 =====

Fig. 2. Learning curves of using MADDPG to train control policies for
the multi-agent coordinated building control. All x-axes represent training
iterations. Losses, i.e., Lactor and Lcritic, are averaged among three agents.
To train control policies for this problem, we use OpenAI’s
MADDPG implementation. Speciﬁcally, agent i trains a critic
network (i.e., Qθi (s, a)) in an off-policy manner to minimize
the mean squared Bellman error (MSBE):
Li
critic(θi) = Es,a,ri,s′[[Qθi (s, a)− (ri +γQθi,− (s′, a′)]2]
(2)
and the actor (i.e., the control policy µφi (si)) is trained by
minimizing the following actor loss:
Li
actor(φi) =−Es,a[Qi
θ(s, [...ai−1,µφi (si),ai+1,... ])] (3)
In the above equations, θi and φi are the RL parameters to
be optimized, and θi,− represents the target value network
parameters (a common off-policy learning trick; see [24] for
details). In our notation, ai and si are the action and state of
agent i, respectively, and the collection of all agents’ actions
and states are written as a and s. the The states at the next
step are denoted s′, and a′ = [µφi (si)|i = 1,... ] are the policy
chosen actions at s′.
Fig. 2 shows the learning curves over 350 training iterations.
By the end of the training, both agent costs and the total cost
converge to a low level. Lcritic starts at a large value and
gradually decreases to a value close to zero, indicating that
the state-action values can be estimated accurately. As the
value estimation becomes more reliable,Lactor also decreases,
implying that the control policies are improving to achieve a
higher reward level for each agent. Finally, the episodic voltage
violation sum,vvio, is high at the beginning, and as the agents
learn to coordinate with one another, the voltage violation is
also eliminated, leading to vvio = 0.
In summary, this example demonstrates using PowerGrid-
world to formulate a MARL problem with both competition
(building comfort) and collaboration (system voltage) among
agents. Admittedly, instead of na ¨ıvely splitting the system
penalty evenly among agents to encourage agents’ coordina-
tion, a more advanced approach could be ﬂexibly implemented
using this framework by modifying the corresponding interfac-
ing functions.
B. Multi-Agent Environment With Heterogeneous Agents
A key feature of the PowerGridworld package is that it
enables users to model heterogeneous agents that interact
both with one another and with the grid. To demonstrate this
feature, we developed a simple example with three differ-
ent agents consisting of one smart building—simulated as a
MultiComponentEnv composed of a ﬁve-zone building, a
solar panel, and a battery component environment—and two
independent component environments representing a PV array
and an electric vehicle (EV) charging station. The agents here
are loosely coupled according to their reward structures and
observation spaces, as described next.
Smart building ( i = 1 ). The ﬁve-zone building has a
simple reward function characterized by a soft constraint that
zone temperatures be maintained within a comfort range. The
building thermal model used is the same as in Section III-A;
the reward function is similar, except that it does not take
power consumption into account.
PV array ( i = 2 ). Next, we include a controllable PV
array as a source of real power injection, with the purpose of
mitigating voltage violations stemming from high real power
demand on the distribution feeder. We model a simple control
whereby the real power injection can be curtailed between 0%
and 100% of available power from the panels; the observation
space consists of both real power available from the panels and
the minimum bus voltage on the feeder, vmin. (The scenario
we consider is stable with respect to maximum feeder voltage.)
The reward function is given by a soft penalty on the minimum
bus voltage, which is computed using OpenDSS.
EV charging station ( i = 3 ). Finally, we consider an
EV charging station with an aggregate, continuous control,
a3∈ [0, 1], representing the rate of charging for all charging
vehicles. For example, with action a3 = 0.25, all charging
vehicles will charge at 25% of the maximum possible rate.
The distribution of vehicles is control dependent because, as
vehicles become fully charged, they leave the station and thus
reduce the aggregate load proﬁle. Furthermore, each vehicle
has prespeciﬁed (exogenous) arrival and departure times, be-
fore and after which it cannot charge. The observation space
consists of a handful of continuous variables characterizing the
station’s current occupancy and aggregate power consumption,
as well as aggregate information about the state of the charging
vehicles. The reward function balances the local task of
meeting demand with a grid-supportive task of keeping the
total real power consumption under a peak threshold. Note
that, while the charging station does not directly respond to
grid signals, the soft constraint on peak power incentivizes
load shifting.
Using RLLib’s multi-agent training framework, we train
separate proximal policy optimization (PPO) [25] policies


===== PAGE 5 =====

Fig. 3. Learning curves for independent PPO policies for the heterogeneous
control problem trained using RLLib. The PPO loss function, L, is given in
(4). All x-axes represent training iterations.
for each agent, with each agent attempting to optimize its
own reward. Although training multi-agent policies in this
way is generally challenging due to nonstationarity, here, the
agents are only loosely coupled through bus voltages in the
PV agent’s reward function, and training converges without
issue—see Fig. 3. The lower panel in the ﬁgure shows the
PPO loss function for each agent’s policy,
L = E
[ T∑
t=0
min
( πθ(at|st)
πθold (at|st)
ˆA(at,st),g
(
ϵ, ˆA(at,st)
))]
(4)
where ˆA is the advantage estimator, g(ϵ,·) is a clipping
function with threshold ϵ, andθold refers to the policy weights
from the previous training iteration. We refer the reader to
[25] for additional details about the PPO algorithm and loss
function.
IV. C ONCLUSION
PowerGridworld ﬁlls a gap in MARL for power systems
by providing users with a lightweight framework for rapidly
prototyping customized, grid-interactive, multi-agent simula-
tions with a bring-your-own-model philosophy. The multi-
agent Gym API and other API converters enable users to
rapidly integrate with existing MARL training frameworks,
including RLLib (multiple algorithms) and OpenAI’s MAD-
DPG implementation. Unlike the CityLearn and GridLearn
software packages, PowerGridworld does not provide carefully
designed benchmarks for a given application, such as demand
response with voltage regulation. Rather, it provides the user
with abstractions that streamline experimentation with novel
multi-agent scenarios, component Gym environments, and
MARL algorithms where the power ﬂow solutions are essential
to the problem. Integration with RLLib, in particular, paves
the way for the use of supercomputing and HPC resources for
RL training, which will become ever more important as the
complexity of MARL simulations continues to increase.
REFERENCES
[1] B. J. Claessens, P. Vrancx, and F. Ruelens, “Convolutional neural
networks for automatic state-time feature extraction in reinforcement
learning applied to residential load control,”IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 3259–3269, 2016.
[2] H. Xu, A. D. Dom ´ınguez-Garc´ıa, and P. W. Sauer, “Optimal tap setting
of voltage regulation transformers using batch reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1990–2001,
2019.
[3] Q. Yang, G. Wang, A. Sadeghi, G. B. Giannakis, and J. Sun, “Two-
timescale voltage control in distribution grids using deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2313–
2323, 2019.
[4] J. Duan et al., “Deep-reinforcement-learning-based autonomous voltage
control for power grid operations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 814–817, 2019.
[5] O. Vinyals et al. , “Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782, pp. 350–354, 2019.
[6] S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Shammah, and A. Shashua, “Safe, multi-
agent, reinforcement learning for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
[7] Y . Gao, W. Wang, and N. Yu, “Consensus multi-agent reinforcement
learning for volt-var control in power distribution networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid , 2021.
[8] D. Chen et al., “PowerNet: Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for
scalable powergrid control,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2021.
[9] A. Pigott, C. Crozier, K. Baker, and Z. Nagy, “GridLearn: Multiagent
reinforcement learning for grid-aware building energy management,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06396 , 2021.
[10] J. K. Terry et al. , “Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14471 , 2020.
[11] G. Brockman et al., “OpenAI Gym,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 ,
2016.
[12] J. R. V ´azquez-Canteli, J. K ¨ampf, G. Henze, and Z. Nagy, “CityLearn
v1.0: An OpenAI Gym environment for demand response with deep
reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM International
Conference on Systems for Energy-Efﬁcient Buildings, Cities, and Trans-
portation, 2019, pp. 356–357.
[13] J. R. Vazquez-Canteli, S. Dey, G. Henze, and Z. Nagy, “CityLearn:
Standardizing research in multi-agent reinforcement learning for
demand response and urban energy management,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.10504, 2020.
[14] D. B. Crawley et al. , “EnergyPlus: creating a new-generation building
energy simulation program,” Energy and Buildings , vol. 33, no. 4, pp.
319–331, 2001.
[15] L. Thurner et al., “pandapower—an open-source python tool for conve-
nient modeling, analysis, and optimization of electric power systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 6510–6521,
2018.
[16] E. Liang et al. , “RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR,
2018, pp. 3053–3062.
[17] “RLLib: Scalable Reinforcement Learning,” https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/
rllib.html, accessed: 2021-11-03.
[18] P. Moritz et al. , “Ray: A distributed framework for emerging AI
applications,” in 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 18) , 2018, pp. 561–577.
[19] “OpenAI,” https://openai.com/about/, accessed: 2021-11-04.
[20] “OpenAI’s MADDPG Implementation,” https://github.com/openai/
maddpg, accessed: 2021-11-03.
[21] R. Lowe, Y . Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02275 , 2017.
[22] A. Rafﬁn, A. Hill, M. Ernestus, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, and N. Dor-
mann, “Stable baselines3,” https://github.com/hill-a/stable-baselines,
2019, accessed: 2021-11-02.
[23] Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), “OpenDSS: EPRI distribution
system simulator,” https://sourceforge.net/projects/electricdss/, accessed:
2021-11-04.
[24] V . Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[25] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
